{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2638
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Oblique;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12500\viewh19080\viewkind1
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Relational Data Model\
\

\f1\b0 Relational database represents data as a collection of relations.\
\
- each column holds an attribute. (SCHEMA)\
- each row(tuple) represents a record of related values (INSTANCE)\
\
\

\f0\b Domains\

\f1\b0 - is a set of 
\f2\i atomic 
\f1\i0 values. \
- atomic means it is not breakable to smaller bits. \
\
\

\f0\b Integrity constraints\
\

\f1\b0 - restrictions on the values in a database \
- derived from the rules in the mini-world that the database represents.\
\

\f0\b - Inherent model-based constraints (implicit constraints)\

\f1\b0 - constraints that already exists in data model, enforced by DBMS e.g. duplicate tuples are not allowed in a relation. \
\

\f0\b \
- Schema-based constraints\

\f1\b0 - constraints based on schemas (the attributes) of the data model e.g. films have only one director.\
\

\f0\b \
- Application-based (semantic constraints)\

\f1\b0 - constraints defined by applications which can differ application to application. \
- not directly expressed in schemas. e.g. this year\'92s salary increase can be no more than last year\'92s.\
\
\

\f0\b Uniqueness constraints\
\
Superkeys:\

\f1\b0 - a set K of attributes of R is called 
\f0\b superkey
\f1\b0  of R if it has the 
\f0\b uniqueness property.\
\
- Uniqueness property: 
\f1\b0 no two different tuples have the same values across all attributes in K. \

\f0\b \
- K 
\f1\b0 is called a 
\f0\b key 
\f1\b0 of R if, additionally, it 
\f0\b also 
\f1\b0 has the 
\f0\b minimality property. \
\
- Minimality property: 
\f1\b0 no proper subset of K has the uniqueness property.\
\

\f0\b Thus, 
\f1\b0 every
\f0\b  key 
\f1\b0 is a
\f0\b  superkey, 
\f1\b0 but not every
\f0\b  superkey 
\f1\b0 is a
\f0\b  key. \
\
\
\

\f1\b0 \

\f0\b \
Candidate keys:\

\f1\b0 - used, in particular, if multiple different keys are possible.\
\

\f0\b Primary key:\

\f1\b0 - there may be more than one candidate key in a relation. \
- a particular candidate key is chosen as the primary \'97> underline its attribute(s)\
- tuple cannot have NULL for any primary key attribute. \
\

\f0\b Other schema-based integrity constraints\
\
- entity integrity constraint: 
\f1\b0 No primary key value can be NULL.\
\

\f0\b - domain constraint: 
\f1\b0 declared by specifying the datatype of the attributes.\

\f0\b \
- referential integrity constraint: \
- 
\f1\b0 maintains consistency among tuples in two relations. \
- allows every tuple in one relation to refer to a tuple in another. }